---
title: Honeysuckle
date: 2024-07-24T18:07:11.848Z
---

[![a honeysuckle
blossom](./honeysuckle.jpg)](https://www.instagram.com/p/B_rQruqpEQU1yAtJ14N58rN8d4Yl61PDMv4AIc0/)

There was a big honeysuckle bush dividing our backyard from our
neighbors in the house in Connecticut where my family lived, from
1985 until my parents finally sold it in 15 years later, a few
years into their divorce. It was a long unkempt monster of a
bush, growing and spilling over the buried remains of a fence,
until it replaced and became the fence, long before our tenure as
residents.

As it grows, a honeysuckle bush forms a dense haphazard matrix of
leaves and thin spiky branches, like a net of sticks, blooming
with small yellow and white flowers. Pretty, but not exactly
beautiful or remarkable.

Underneath its impenetrable carapace, a mature honeysuckle bush
discards all but the thickest branches, supporting its outward
quest for dominance and sun. Nothing grows in the dark caves of
its interior spaces. It's former self continually replaced with
supportive emptiness.

As a small child, I would spend hours at a time in this hidden
place. I brought treasures and books and pictures. It was my own
secret cave, where I was the sole explorer. I found and unearthed
the old remnants of the fence it had long ago devoured, and
without knowing it, formed vivid intense memories of the feel of
the old wood and the intricate shapes of the twine wrapped around
it, perhaps to support the bush in its infancy, or perhaps in a
vain attempt to keep the fence itself from coming apart.

In that place, I was safe, and yet being there had a sense of
darkness and foreboding, imbued with the freedom and wild danger
of solitude. It was safe; home, but apart from home, and the
intensity of a world that I never felt fully a part of. Alone, I
could be me, without explanations.

Now I am a man, a partner and a father, and have precious few
opportunities to lose myself hidden away in a dark thicket of
brambles. My life and self have expanded far beyond that child,
leaving pockets of void in many of the spaces he once filled, as
the ego expands to live up to the promises it makes itself.

I wouldn't say that honeysuckle is my favorite flower. But the
smell of it produces such an overwhelmingly painful and joyful
nostalgia that I get dizzy from the emotional impact and have to
brace myself so I don't fall over. There's nothing like it.
