---
title: Leveraging the Suffering Set-Point
date: 2024-09-08T22:51:21.282Z
tags:
  - the practice
  - my religion
  - philosophy
  - optimistic nihilism
  - the human condition
---

In psychology, ["Set Point
Theory"](https://www.sciencedirect.com/topics/psychology/set-point-theory)
is the idea that humans have a given set-point of hedonic
pleasure/suffering that we are always drawn to throughout out
lives.

This results in the concept of a ["Hedonic
Treadmill"](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hedonic_treadmill),
where no matter how much pleasure we may add to our lives, we
will always feel about the same level of happiness. It's
hopeless!

Or is it?

## Manipulating the Hedonistat

I imagine it like this: my mind, body, and soul will work
together<sup><a href="#hedonistat-fn1"
id="hedonistat-ref1">1</a></sup> to ensure that I'm always at the
same basic "level" of happiness.

Put another way, they work together to keep me at the same basic
level of _suffering_.

Feelings, of course, are information, which we ignore at our
peril! But, some "emotions" can be quite easily found by choosing
a given framing, or even (in the case of anxiety or low
self-worth) manufactured by the mind completely out of fantasy
without any referent at all.

When we do not have enough suffering in our lives, our brains
will summon some suffering for us, to keep us at the baseline.

This is the Hedonistat.

## Don't Let Go

Some two and a half millennia ago, some guy made the
ground-breaking observation that life is out of joint. The
hedonistat ensures we will suffer, no matter what. The only way
out is to release all attachments to desire, seek the void and
moments of enlightenment, to free ourselves from the cycle of
suffering and desire.

But what if I _like_ wanting things and stuff?

I've realized recently that it is possible to _deliberately_
adjust the hedonistat by _adding suffering_, in a way that is
healthy and beneficial. And, by framing it as a simple trade,
"Would you rather suffer with X or suffer with Y?", I'm able to
trick my inner pathological demand avoidance demons without
having to summon inhuman levels of executive function and will.

## My Experience With This

Last year, a few life events (including but not limited to [my
dad dying](/2023/02/to-my-father/)) left me in a pretty dark
place, and my natural neuroticism really kind of got the best of
me for a while. It's humbling to admit, to be honest.

At the start of 2024, I made a New Year's Resolution (lol) to
"churn grief into sweat". Around March (that is, _not_ January),
I finally actually did something in that direction, by signing up
for exercise classes at the gym closest to my house, which
happens to be a Muay Thai gym<sup><a href="#hedonistat-fn2"
id="hedonistat-ref2">2</a></sup>.

I really _hate_ that class. It's profoundly not fun.

The people there are great, the trainer is encouraging, and the
exercise has actually been helping with some long-covid symptoms.
I'm not in the best shape of my life (that is almost certainly
behind me at this point), but I'm already in much better shape
than I was last year. But it sucks and it hurts, every time.

Hating the class _is the point_. It's a sacrificial thing to
deliberately not enjoy, so that my idiot brain will check the box
and get out of the way of the rest of my life.

Every time I consider not going, I remember that if I don't go
suffer at the class, by jumping and lifting and running and
bloody-fucking-kill-my-lungs burpeeing for an hour, I'm going to
probably find myself at bedtime replaying the saddest and most
anxiety-inducing horrors my brain can cook up. I don't have to
care about gains or goals or anything; just go have a small
amount of bad time, and everything else will be fine.

The results have been awesome. Besides just the normal physical
benefits of regular exercise, I've been happier, calmer, more
balanced, more aware of what's working for me and what isn't,
more able to let go of what doesn't matter, and appreciate what
does.

Those monks flagellating themselvesâ€¦ I _get_ it now.

{{ page | tumble({ youtube: "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YgYEuJ5u1K0" }) | safe }}

---

###### Footnotes

<small id="hedonistat-fn1">**1** Of course,
these three are one in the same, simply viewed from different
angles of analysis, the Holy Trinity of oneself. <a href="#hedonistat-ref1">back</a></small>

<small id="hedonistat-fn2">**2** A similar location-based
selection criteria is how I ended up studying Taekwondo in my
late 20s, eventually getting a black belt after training about 20
hours a week for almost 2 years. And in hindsight, I think it was
a similar sort of "self-medicating with less harmful suffering"
kind of behavior. I'm not actually training to fight this time.
I'm in my 40s, I'm just there to peacefully exercise. It is fun
to kick the bags sometimes and let my legs pretend they can still
break stuff, though. <a href="#hedonistat-ref2">back</a></small>
