---
title: Test Assertion Styles in JavaScript
slug: software-testing-assertion-styles
date: 2023-09-30T04:28:11.618Z
tags:
  - oss
  - testing
  - javascript
  - tap
  - infodump
  - special interest
---

[Wes Todd](https://wesleytodd.com) asked me:

> reminding myself of [tap](https://node-tap.org)â€™s api, can you
> sell me on why people like a test runner to have built in
> assertions?

I answered and he said it should be a blog post, and I obviously
agreed. So here's the infodump that is even more verbose than the
one he got in slack.

---

A lot of it is down to subjective taste, and like a lot of
subjective stuff, you kind of have to give yourself time to
acquire a taste for a thing in order to really appreciate it. And
once you do, you might still eventually decide it's just not for
you. I have [my own
preferences](https://node-tap.org/#why-tap%3F) in the matter,
obviously, but I try to be fair when explaining the pros and
cons.

**There are no wrong answers as long as you write tests that help
you make good software.** But in general, the reason for having
an assertion lib in the test framework (rather than just throwing
on any failure) is so that you can have _multiple_ assertions in
a given batch with less boilerplate, and fully decouple the
_test_ from the _runner_.

There are two general approaches that are common in JavaScript
testing APIs, which I think of as "the **spec family**" and "the
**tap family**". These aren't firm categories; it's a bimodal
distribution, with quite a bit of overlap.

These families are not unique to JavaScript, and you often see
one or the other being more popular with a given language
community. JavaScript being what it is, of course, we do
everything in every _possible_ way, with several different
implementations of each.

The most common complaint about JavaScript is the embarassment of
riches in open source tooling options, that it moves too fast and
there are too many choices. For a language that is both
functional and object oriented, running on such a wide array of
environments, with the more developers than any other language by
a wide margin, this should be no surprise.

In this case, the fundamental divide comes down to where a test
framework places its boundary of agnosticism; where it is _a la
carte_ and where it is _omakase_.

Frameworks in the spec family tend to be agnostic about the means
of declaring a test function has passed or failed (any throw will
do, do nothing and it passes). Frameworks in the tap family tend
to be agnostic about the boundary between the runner and the test
suite process (anything emitting TAP on stdout and exiting with 0
or not-0 status will do). Each choice has its pros and cons.

## Spec Family

In the spec family (eg: mocha, lab, jest), you have a block that
defines a suite, and within that, you create a test block
function. If that test function throws, the test fails,
otherwise, it passes. They often (but not always) are paired with
assertion libraries that provide a "literate programming" API.

```js
describe('account', () => {
  it('has a balance of zero when first created', () => {
    // if this throws, the test fails
    expect(new Account().balance).to.equal(0)
  })
  it('has an empty list of initial addresses', () => {
    expect(new Account().addresses).to.match([])
  })
})
```

Historically, these are largely inspired by RSpec, and much of
the current popularity of this style can be traced back to TJ
Holowaychuk's development of ruby-inspired testing tools in the
early days of Node.js, eventually culminating in Mocha.

```ruby
RSpec.describe Account do
  it "has a balance of zero when first created" do
    expect(Account.new.balance).to eq(Money.new(0))
  end
end
```

The spec family of JS testing tools rely heavily on decorating
the thrown `Error` object, and building up a tree of suites and
tests which are then evaluated. The "protocol" boundary _between
the test and harness_ is based on direct access to shared (or
directly serialized) object structures, and is thus highly
opinionated.

Within a given framework, these opinionated parts of the
interface can be formalized, so that a variety of reporters can
be created to turn the tree of Suite and Test objects into
human-readable output, but the barrier to doing so is higher.

Also, the `describe`/`it`/`context`/etc functions (what Mocha
calls its "BDD" and "TDD" interfaces) are injected as globals,
but only when run with the dedicated runner. Jest takes this a
step further, parsing tests and running them in a fully
virtualized environment, meaning that they can effectively _only_
be run with the test framework's runner.

However, the boundary between the _test functions themselves_ and
the framework as a whole is completely agnostic. Any throw will
do. So, there can be quite a lot of innovation and variety in how
those errors are generated and thrown.

## Tap Family

The tap family of tools are traditionally built around the [Test
Anything Protocol](http://testanything.org), a text based
protocol which describes the results of a test run. TAP is
human-readable and machine-parseable, meaning that the results
can be inspected directly, turned into reports, stored,
aggregated, and so on. Most test frameworks today have the
capacity to output TAP, even if they are not built around the
protocol as a first-class concern.

Testing tools in this family include tap, tape, and (at least in
the presented API, if not all of the internal mechanisms) ava.

Rather than always throwing on a failed assertion and a set of
global functions to create suites and test blocks, frameworks in
this family expose a single `t` object with assertion methods
that define "test points". Passing test points are reported along
with failures in the TAP stream, though these are often omitted
from reports.

```js
t.equal(new Account().balance, 0, 'balance of zero when first created')
t.match(new Account().addresses, [], 'empty list of addresses')
```

Suites of test points can be grouped using the `test` method on these
objects, nested indefinitely, with each subsequent test blocking
getting a `t` object relating to the subtest.

```js
t.test('account', async t => {
  const a = new Account()
  t.equal(a.balance, 0, 'balance of zero when first created')
  t.match(a.addresses, [], 'empty list of addresses')
  t.test('credits', async t => {
    a.credit(100)
    t.equal(a.balance, -100, 'negative balance after credit')
    a.debit(200)
    t.equal(a.balance, 100, 'positive balance after debit')
  })
})
```

TAP started with Larry Wall's perl test scripts, evolving into
CPAN's various
[`Test`](https://metacpan.org/dist/Test-Simple/view/lib/Test/Tutorial.pod)
libraries, and which in turn spawned an ecosystem of TAP
producers in various languages.

Because failing test points don't throw, and passing test points
are reported, there's no need for as many layers of enclosing
block functions, reducing the boilerplate. Ie, instead of
`describe(groupName, () => { it(thingName, () => { assert(cond)
}) })`, the minimum "just test a thing" that shows some output on
success is just `t.ok(cond, message)`.

This is less boilerplate for writing tests, but of course noisier
output, which is pretty much always addressed by having a
reporter that parses the standard TAP output and doesn't bother
showing you all the passing tests (unless you want it to).

Because the boundary of agnosticism is between the _test file and
the runner_, test files can be anything, and can be run by any
any TAP-consuming harness. Or, they can even be piped to a file,
and their results reported long after the fact. It's not uncommon
to use a runner for tests that are using some other TAP producing
test framework, perhaps even in another language. I've seen the
perl `prove` tool used to run node-tap tests, and written tests
in bash that are run by node-tap. This means that the framework
typically doesn't _have_ to create a specially crafted
environment for tests, and they can be run any which way, just as
(more or less) "normal" programs.

The trade-off is that these tools typically _don't_ have as
fully agnostic a way to define tests themselves. Because the
expectation is that the test generates a TAP stream, and you
typically want that to capture passes as well as failures, you
see these collections of assertion methods that come along with
the framework itself, because they have to be hooked into the
structure to generate valid TAP (even though this "in-test"
framework can be fully decoupled from the runner).

## It's Software, you can do anything with anything

As I said, these are not strict categories, but more of a bimodal
distribution of styles and approaches, informed by what the
preferences of the creators of these frameworks about what is
important to keep flexible, vs what was important to keep
consistent.

Pretty much every popular test framework _can_ output a TAP
stream. And a thrown error in any popular framework will be
treated as a test failure and handled reasonably.

But the focus and features of a framework will be designed around
its goals, and that tends to show. The TAP stream output by mocha
or jest tends to be much less expressive than that emitted by tap
or tape; and the level of integration between the runner,
reporter, and framework is much reduced in tap family frameworks,
which can sometimes limit what they are capable of providing.

## _Aside: TAP Family Cousins, `*Unit`_

TAP is not the only popular cross-platform protocol for
expressing test results as a text stream. Another popular option
is the XML format popularized by JUnit, PHPUnit, and xUnit.
(Technically xUnit is a somewhat different schema from JUnit, but
the principle is the same.)

It's an old joke that Java is a DSL for turning XML into stack
traces. JUnit is a DSL for turning stack traces into XML. Because
the test results are captured in a formalized text-based format,
the results can be saved to a file, reported after the fact, and
so on. Anything that generates this text format can interoperate
with anything that can consume it.

That's why I consider these test frameworks related to the TAP
family; possibly by convergent evolution as much as by direct
inspiration, I don't know enough of the history of both to say
one way or the other. I've heard that JUnit borrowed a lot from
SUnit, but I've also read that SUnit was more of an idea that
multiple smalltalk teams tended to adopt, rather than a specific
format or piece of software.

## Personally...

I like the tap family tools better. I'm not saying that they
_are_ better, they just appeal to my preferences and style. I
_often_ want to replay tests, look at the raw data, etc. And my
first instinct when I want to zoom in on a test is to just run it
as a normal program to be able to poke at it when I'm debugging
something or working on a new feature. I get frustrated and
annoyed when I can't just run a node program with node and see
the results right there. And I often work on libraries and
programs where things just won't work properly in a sandboxed
testing VM, no matter how cleverly implemented.

Yes, providing a nicely integrated experience can be more
challenging with that approach, but I find the separation of
concerns beneficial enough to make it worthwhile.
