---
layout: layouts/post.njk
title: Next Phase Montage
tags:
  - startup life
  - exiting
  - entering
  - phase shift
  - narrative arc
  - looking back
  - retrospective
  - looking forward
  - i guess that'd be just spective
  - chapter and act delineations
  - wagon fulla pamcakes?
  - in the champeenship?
  - showdown
  - put your nose down
date: 2020-03-16T17:00:00.000Z
via:
  name: npmjs
  url: https://blog.npmjs.org/post/612764866888007680/next-phase-montage
---

[npmjs](https://blog.npmjs.org/post/612764866888007680/next-phase-montage)

tl;dr -- Good news!

- [**npm, Inc., is being purchased by
  GitHub.**](https://github.blog/2020-03-16-npm-is-joining-github/)

- The public registry remains public, free, and as available as ever.

- npm as you know it continues, and in fact, there is good reason to
  believe that it'll only get better.

- I'm still going to be working on npm (but with the luxury of more
  resources and less stress).

- I'm really excited about the stuff we're going to do.

------

It is customary for a founder, in the closing chapter of their startup, to
ruminate in a blog post about their incredible journey<sup
style="font-size: 0.8em"><a href="#montagefn1"
id="montageref1">[1]</a></sup>.  When we founded npm, Inc., I knew that I
was signing up for a post like this someday.  I'm extremely thankful that
this is the one I get to write<sup style="font-size: 0.8em"><a
href="#montagefn2" id="montageref2">[2]</a></sup>.

## history and origin

Back in 2009, after too long without a vacation, I quit my job, in hopes of
discovering what happens when I untether my creativity.

What happened is I wrote a package manager.

I created npm with the goal of sharing modules in a tiny group of nerdy
weirdos who'd decided to write web servers in JavaScript.  From that niche
beginning, npm grew, slowly but surely, the background project I'd greedily
steal away time for.

At the end of 2013, npm hit a rough spot and we had to make a decision.
This was the first big bookmark in the npm story, when the project could no
longer survive on donations.  We made some slide decks and raised an amount
of money that seemed enormous at the time, but inevitably got spent
_really_ fast.

## the part where i talk about startups

Running a company is *hard*.  It is grueling, unglamorous work.

I don't want to make it sound completely terrible.  There are definitely a
few awesome parts.  But once is enough for me.

Throughout this journey, our north star has been the mission that we
founded this company with: **reduce friction in JavaScript software
development**.

I have a set of goals that I wrote down back then, and have shared openly
with the team.  They haven't changed much.

1. Keep the npm registry running forever (not only for the life of the
   company).
2. Be a company that we can all enjoy working at, and do the best work of
   our careers up until now.
3. Get a big enough exit that I can quit my job and see what comes out of
   me a second time.
4. Share the rewards equitably with the people who got npm to where it is.

There are few unmitigated successes or failures in the real world.  But
this is a win, and a good one, for me and the team and the entire
JavaScript community.

We have made tremendous progress on (1), and that's the thing I'm happiest
about in this.  As far as (2), there's been ups and downs, to say the
least, but the bright spots outshine the dark.  I've lost some valued
friendships in the process, but made a few as well.  On (3), well, I'm
still working a jobby job, but I always knew that was a long shot, and
"make npm a better package manager" is a job I enjoy.  And as for (4), I'm
proud of the deals that we've been able to negotiate for the team.

It's not a kajillion billion dollar 10x startup cinderella story, and we've
taken our hits, but in the end we've done right by our community, team, and
careers, and I'm extremely proud of what we've achieved.

## the part where i talk about the company buying us

One of the questions founders get asked a lot is "what might your exit look
like?"  I always mentioned the big tech companies as possibilities, and
GitHub as a sort of "wishful thinking" option.

I've been following GitHub's trajectory closely since they came to Yahoo!
to give a talk about git and social coding [way back in
2009](https://yuiblog.com/blog/2009/09/29/video-github/)<sup
style="font-size: 0.8em"><a href="#montagefn3"
id="montageref3">[3]</a></sup>.  It's been a huge part of my life ever
since I dove head-first into open source as a lifestyle choice.

When I saw the GitHub Packages beta announcement and demo at GitHub HQ in
San Francisco, I remember turning to Shanku Niyogi and clumsily blurting
out, "Why aren't you trying to buy us?"

It seemed so maddeningly... _obvious_.  Forget about whose logo is on which
webpage, just... if you're going to _do_ this thing, do it _right_, ffs.
This clearly needs to be integrated with the actual registry in a very deep
way.  "I mean... You _see_ that, right?"  (I think he probably did.  And if
he didn't, then props to him for taking my reaction as flattery or a good
idea, rather than condescension.)

What I didn't really expect at the beginning of the acquisition process was
how much I'd genuinely _like_ everyone I met at GitHub, starting with my
initial conversations with Nat, as well as all the people on the team he's
built.  As we dug into the technical and strategic plans for how npm would
fit into the vision of GitHub moving forward, it became clear that this
isn't just a good option for the JavaScript community -- it's significantly
_better_ than what npm, Inc., can provide on its own.

There are not many companies that can claim to have the kind of fanatical
commitment to open source that GitHub does.  In the track record of Nat and
the team he's assembled, there's really something special here that I'm
thrilled to be a part of.

I've said countless times before that I wouldn't let the registry go
someplace that won't take care of it.  (See goal (1) above.  I've
sacrificed years of my life and put a strain on many personal and
professional relationships in pursuit of that goal.)

As GitHub has branched out into other aspects of the end-to-end developer
community experience, it's natural to see how the JavaScript package
management process fits into that story.  It's not a loss leader or an
experimental add-on or a way to quickly hire a team.  Rather, the npm
registry is a significant and concrete strategic asset serving GitHub's
mission of eliminating transaction costs in software development.

That's important.

## the part about what comes next

Today, npm serves over 1.3 million packages to roughly 12 million
developers, who download these things 75 billion times a month, and all of
this is growing at a rate that ensures these massive numbers will seem
small in a few years.

Our commitment to that community is to keep the npm registry free for open
source development for the foreseeable future, and continue to improve the
npm CLI.  At GitHub, npm will have the added support and backing of one of
the world's largest companies, behind the world's largest community of
developers.

There are some awesome opportunities for improvement in the npm experience,
to meaningfully improve life for JS devs in countless large and small ways.
We'll be making things more reliable, convenient, and connected for
everyone across our vast interdependent JavaScript ecosystem.

For six years, in the grind of a startup, we've had dreams too big to dare
hope for.  This next chapter is a chance to realize those dreams.

This is the end of "npm, Inc.", the Delaware C Corp.  But it's an exciting
upgrade for npm.

------

<small id="montagefn1" style="font-size: 0.8em"><a
href="#montageref1">[1]</a>: Reference joke [Our Incredible
Journey](https://ourincrediblejourney.tumblr.com/)</small>

<small id="montagefn2" style="font-size: 0.8em"><a
href="#montageref2">[2]</a>: It's also worth noting that GitHub allowed
such a long, nuanced, and candid announcement as this one, and didn't push
for a watered down corporate version.  Cultural alignment is a good
sign.</small>

<small id="montagefn3" style="font-size: 0.8em"><a
href="#montageref3">[3]</a>: Check out the date on the [post for that
talk](https://yuiblog.com/blog/2009/09/29/video-github/).  Then note the
date on [this
commit](https://github.com/npm/cli/commit/4626dfa73b7847e9c42c1f799935f8242794d020).
It's like some kind of cryptic message from the past, and it's weirding me
out, tbh.</small>
