---
title: On growing up with a unique name that did not remain unique
date: 2021-11-28T01:03:24.303Z
tags:
- whats in a name
- isaac
- idle ruminations
---
"Isaac" used to be a very uncommon first name in the USA for anyone who
wasn't Jewish or Mormon, and my last name is a particular anglicized
spelling of a fairly uncommon German name. (I have distant cousins who came
over and got a different anglicized spelling.)

I grew up never ever hearing my name unless someone was talking to me, so
never got desensitized to it in the way that someone named "Chris" or
"Matt" or "John" would have.

Then when I was about 20, the 21st century happened, and every American
parent found out about this trendy cool first name that made them seem
smart and unique, and decided to give it to their kids. In the mid-2000s I
kept having this strange experience (as in, _yes, this happened irl several
times_) of being in a supermarket, minding my business, selecting items and
such, and hearing someone from behind me yell in the most authoritative
tone you could imagine, "ISAAC! PUT THAT DOWN!" which always made me jump
and timidly put down whatever I had been holding and turn around to find
out why I, a whole grown ass man, was being scolded, but also knowing from
the tone and intonation that I was clearly in some kind of trouble. Like,
full on Bene Geserit "the voice"-style automatic unthinking instinct
reaction.

Only to find some poor tired parent trying to maintain an unruly 5 year old
in the supermarket.

Around the mid- to late-2010s, more and more Isaacs showed up online,
including **THREE** with my spelling of my last name.

Joke's on them. I've been extremely online for decades now, and I freaking
dominate those search results. Good luck getting any google juice, suckers.
May as well just learn JavaScript and start tweeting.
